## Comparison of metrics for identification of Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs)


Compare all metrics to identify KBAs with criteria B1 for Ariagona margaritae: (i) mature individuals, (ii) area of occupancy, (iii) extend of suitable habitat, (iv) range, (v) number of localities, and (vi) distinct genetic diversity. Additionally a structure analysis and a PCA was conducted, potential KBAs were identified and the results of all metrics were compared. Detailed discriptions of all calculations can be found at: 
Gronefeld, S. C., López, H., Hawlitschek, O., Schulte-Middelmann, T., Hofmann, F., Tandukar, P., & Hochkirch, A. (2026). Comparison of metrics for identifying Key Biodiversity Areas. Biological Conservation, 319, 111863. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2026.111863


Assessing genetic data: 
First of all the raw reads were processed in assess_genetic_data/1_stacks. In assess_genetic_data/2_quality control a PCA was conducted using plink. In assess_genetic_data/3_structure a structure clusters were calculated and the most likely cluster was selected. This analyses was done before its results were used to calculate (vi) distinct genetic diversity. 


(i) mature individuals: 
The analysis is based on a single script, which can be found in: i_number_of_mature_individuals. 


(ii) area of occupancy: 
The analysis is based on a single script, which can be found in: ii_area_of_occupancy. 


(iii) extend of suitable habitat: 
The analysis started with a folder containing the code (scripts/), a folder containing coordinate information (occurrences/), and a folder containing the raster files (env_variables/).Code in iii_extend_of_suitable_habitat/scripts/0_google_engine/ was used to calculate vegetation and moisture indices from google engine. In iii_extend_of_suitable_habitat/scripts/1_prepare_rasters/ the raster files were edited. Distances were calculated to change all categorical raster files into a have continous values. Furthermore, the DEM was used to calculate hillshade, sloope, aspect, curvature, and the Terrain Ruggedness Index (TRI). All rasters were combined to a stacked raster file in iii_extend_of_suitable_habitat/scripts/2_combine_rasters/. In iii_extend_of_suitable_habitat/scripts/3_prepare_stack/ correlating rasters were removed and rasters which were provided by Copernicus and the Spanish Government were compared, to decide which one of them should be included in the analyses. In the fourth step (4_create_occ_table), occurence points for each individual were transformed to a table which contains all occurence points of the species. In the fifth step (5_reduce_stack_size) a dummy raster stack was created with reduced size to test models and estimate calculation times. The sixth step (6_local_computer_tests), contains test scripts that were performed on a normal computer, before the code was adjusted to a High Performance Cumputing (HPC) cluster computer. After the code performed well on a normal computer, the models were calcualted in iii_extend_of_suitable_habitat/scripts/7_model/. The script 1_0_preparations_and_single_models.R calculates all models. It is executed by 1_0_preparations_and_single_models.sh. Afterwards the quality of the models were tested with 1_1_quality_control.R, which was executed by 1_1_quality_control.sh. All models which performed well were combined in an ensembled model with 2_0_ensembled_model.R, which was executed by 2_0_ensembled_model.sh. The performance of the ensembled model was controlled calculating response curves with the following scripts: 2_1_response_curves_median.R executed by 2_1_response_curves_median.sh and 2_2_response_curves_bivariate.R executed by 2_2_response_curves_bivariate.sh. The code to project the models is saved in iii_extend_of_suitable_habitat/scripts/8_projections/. The single models were projected with: 1_single_projections.R executed by 1_single_projections.sh. The ensembled model was projected using 2_ensembled_projection.R executed by 2_ensembled_projection.sh. note_projecting_large_raster_files.txt contains an idea how the ensembled model could be projected in an 10 x 10 m solution. Finally the projection of the ensembled model was transformed into an sf object and ESH was calculated using the intersection of the sf object with range. The code for the final step is saved in iii_extend_of_suitable_habitat/scripts/9_suitable_habitat/. 


(iv) range: 
The range was calculated using the range.R script in iv_range/.


(v) number of localities: 
The analysis is based on a single script, which can be found in: v_number_of_localities. 


(vi) distinct genetic diversity: 
3 different methods were used to calculate distinct genetic diversity.


1. Delta+ was applied as recommended in the KBA Standard. The code is saved in vi_distinct_genetic_diversity/KBAs_seen_isolated.R.

2. Delta+ was applied using a complementarity-based approach. The code is saved in vi_distinct_genetic_diversity/optimization/code. If you would like to perfom this analysis with your own dataset you should copy this code saved vi_distinct_genetic_diversity/optimization/code and create an R project in a folder, which contains the folder "code". Add your data in a folder called "data". The folder should contain a SNP or microsatellite file. We used a structure file calles SNPs.stru. The folder should also contain your collection data. We named our collection data table "collection_data.csv". Furthermore, the data folder should contain the potential KBAs. We included the potential KBAs in data/potential_KBAs/potential_KBAs.shp. The folder "funcions" contains functions which were used throughout the entire project. Keep this folder and ignore it. You might want to start with your data preparation. We prepared our data with code saved in code/preparation. Libraries needed for data preparation were loaded using load.libraries.R. The potential KBA shape file was created using the define_potential_KBAs.R script. In the next step information on the potential KBAs were added to our SNP.stru file in the form of a genind object into the population section. You should start with selecting the necessary number of individuals. We used 10 individuals. To find this number we created rarefraction curves (analyzes/best_number_of_individuals/rarefraction.R). The code vi_distinct_genetic_diversity/optimization/code/analyzes/best_number_of_individuals/areas_used.R is obligatory, as it is only for visualisation which potential KBAs are part of the analysis. The main calculations are saved in vi_distinct_genetic_diversity/optimization/code/best_bootstraps_number. The calculation was repeated 50 to 500 times on a HPC computer. The calculation is always the same regardless of how often it was repeated. It is always calculated using find_best_KBA_combination.R and executed using find_best_KBA_combination.sh. The difference between the scipts in the different folders from 50 to 500 is the number of bootstraps they have been adjusted to. For the calculation the function folder needs to be in the correct place. After all bootstraps were calculated we can check which bootstrap number was performing well. This was done using the script vi_distinct_genetic_diversity/optimization/code/analyzes/best_number_of_individuals/sensitivity_analysis.R. The results can be visualized with the sensitivity_plot.R in the same folder. This code created SuppFig. 10 in the article of Gronefeld et al. 2026. After performing the sensitivity analysis, which tested which bootstrap number creates robust results, two KBA combinations appeared to encompass high genetic diversity. The performance of the two combinations was tested using code saved in vi_distinct_genetic_diversity/optimization/code/best_stable_combination. The genetic diversity observed in the complementarity-based calculation was extracted using observed_EDplus.R. Additionally, the genetic diversity of both combinations was estimated outside of the complementarity-based approach using estimate_real_EDplus.R. Both results were compared in Plot_Coefficient_of_Variation.R and plot_differences_in_EDplus.R. Plot_Coefficient_of_Variation.R was used to create SuppFig. 12 and plot_differences_in_EDplus.R was used to create SuppFig. 11 in the article of Gronefeld et al. 2026. Finally, it was tested if the resulting best combination was performing better than any random combination of areas. Code analysing this is saved in vi_distinct_genetic_diversity/optimization/code/analyzes/better_than_random/. EDplus_of_random_areas.R can be executed on a normal computer. The same code was adjusted to a HPC cluster: EDplus_of_random_areas_cluster.R, EDplus_of_random_areas_cluster.sh. These scripts calculate the genetic diversity of random combination of areas. The genetic diversity of these combinations can be compared to the genetic diversity of our best combination using Z_score.R.

3. prioritizr was used. The code was saved in vi_distinct_genetic_diversity/optimization/prioritizR_using_genetic_structure.R. It is explained in the Supplementary Example Code in the article of Gronefeld et al. 2026. The file used can be downloaded from Dryad (doi:https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.tmpg4f5dj).

